Add new post on release automation (#69)
asyncapi/website: content/blog/automated-releases.md

---
title: "Full automation of release to NPM and Docker Hub with GitHub Actions and Conventional Commits"
date: 2020-03-18T08:00:00+01:00
type: blog
featured: true
tags:
  - GitHubActions
  - Release
  - Generator
cover: /images/posts/robot.png
weight: 100
authors:
  - name: Lukasz Gornicki
    photo: /images/avatars/lpgornicki.png
    link: https://twitter.com/derberq
    byline: AsyncAPI Maintainer and Dev Comm Keeper
---

> tl;dr
from now on, we release [generator](https://github.com/asyncapi/generator/) in an automated way. We roll-out this setup to the rest when we see it is needed.

Repetitive tasks are tedious. If what you do manually can be automated, then what are you waiting for! 

> _But these tasks take only a couple of minutes from time to time, gimme a break_

> A couple of minutes here, a couple of minutes there and all suddenly you do not have time on more important things, on innovation. Automation makes it easier to scale and eliminates errors. Distractions consume time and make you less productive.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A couple of minutes here, a couple of minutes there and all of a sudden you do not have time on more important things, on innovation. Automation makes it easier to scale and eliminates errors. Distractions consume time and make you less productive.
```

> We kick ass at [AsyncAPI Initiative](https://www.asyncapi.com/) at the moment. We started regularly improve our tooling. We are now periodically sharing project status in our [newsletter](https://www.asyncapi.com/subscribe), and host [bi-weekly open meetings](https://github.com/asyncapi/asyncapi/issues/115), but most important is that we just recently updated our roadmap.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We kick ass at [AsyncAPI Initiative](https://www.asyncapi.com/) at the moment. We started to improve our tooling regularly. We are now periodically sharing project status in our [newsletter](https://www.asyncapi.com/subscribe), and host [bi-weekly open meetings](https://github.com/asyncapi/asyncapi/issues/115), but most important is that we just recently updated our roadmap.
```

> Am I just showing off? It sounds like, but that is not my intention. I wish to point out we are productive, and we want to continue this trend, this means we need automation. If you have libraries that you want to release regularly and you plan additional ones to come, you need to focus on release automation.

Reviewer: > I wish to point out we are productive, and we want to continue this trend, this means we need automation.

We need automation because we're productive? Sounds strange :)

Author: I meant we need automation as we want to continue on being productive.
How about

```
I wish to point out we are productive, and we want to continue this trend and automation helps here a lot.
```

Reviewer: That sounds much better 👍

## What full automation means

Full automation means that the release process if fully automated with no manual steps. What else did you think?

<iframe src="https://giphy.com/embed/6uGhT1O4sxpi8" width="480" height="240" frameBorder="0" class="giphy-embed" allowFullScreen></iframe>

Your responsibility is just to merge a pull request. The automation handles the rest. 

You might say: _but I do not want to release on every merge, sometimes I merge changes that are not related to the functionality of the library_.

This is a valid point. You need a way to recognize if the given commit should trigger the release and what kind of version, PATCH, or MINOR. The way to do it is to introduce in your project [Conventional Commits](https://www.conventionalcommits.org/en/v1.0.0/) specification.

## Conventional Commits

At [AsyncAPI Initiative](https://www.asyncapi.com/) we use [Semantic Versioning](https://semver.org/). This is why choosing [Conventional Commits](https://www.conventionalcommits.org/en/v1.0.0/) specification was a natural decision.

> Purpose of Conventional Commits is to make commits not only human-readable but also machine-readable. It defines a set of commit prefixes (but not exclusively) that can be easily parsed and analyzed by tooling.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Purpose of Conventional Commits is to make commits not only human-readable but also machine-readable. It defines a set of commit prefixes that can be easily parsed and analyzed by tooling.
```

"(not exclusively)" feels unnecessarily distracting to me. It makes the sentence hard to read and doesn't add any value, IMO.

This is how the version of the library looks like when it follows semantic versioning: `MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH`. How does the machine know what release you want to bump because of a given commit? Simplest mapping looks like in the following list:

- Commit message prefix `fix: ` indicates `PATCH` release,
- Commit message prefix `feat: ` indicates `MINOR` release,

> - Commit message prefix `{ANY_PREFIX}!: ` so for example `refactor!: ` indicates `MAJOR` release.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Commit message prefix `{ANY_PREFIX}!: ` so for example `feat!:` or even `refactor!: ` indicate `MAJOR` release.
```

I thought it was convenient to mention that `feat!:` can also trigger a major version. As it is right now, it **seems** that `refactor!:` is the one to bump major or that `feat!:` would not do it. I know it's clarified when you say `{ANY_PREFIX}` but still.

It other words, assume your version was 1.0.0, and you made a commit like `feat: add a new parameter to test endpoint`. You can have a script that picks up `feat: ` and triggers release that eventually bumps to version 1.1.0.

## Workflow design

At [AsyncAPI Initiative](https://www.asyncapi.com/) where we introduced the release pipeline for the very first time, we had to do the following automatically:

- Tag Git repository with a new version
- Create GitHub Release
- Push new version of the package to [NPM](https://www.npmjs.com/)
- Push new version of Docker image to [Docker Hub](https://hub.docker.com/)
- Bump the version of the package in `package.json` file and commit the change to the repository

This is how the design looks like:

![npm docker release workflow](/images/posts/release-workflow.png)

There are two workflows designed here. 

> The first workflow reacts to changes in the release branch (`master` in this case) and decides if release should be triggered, and triggers it. The last step of the workflow is a pull request creation with changes in `package.json`. Why are changes not committed directly to the release branch? Because in the majority of cases, people, like we in AsyncAPI, use branch protection rules and do not allow direct commits to release branches.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first workflow reacts to changes in the release branch (`master` in this case), decides if release should be triggered, and triggers it. The last step of the workflow is a pull request creation with changes in `package.json` and `package-lock.json`. Why are changes not committed directly to the release branch? Because we use branch protection rules and do not allow direct commits to release branches.
```

We don't have stats on how often people apply branch protection rules, do we? Also, if was hard to read with so many commas :)

> The second workflow is just for handling changes in `package.json`. To fulfill branch protection settings, we had to auto-approve the pull request so we can automatically merge it.

Reviewer: Which workflow? The first? The second? The whole one?

Author: I read it a couple of times and I'm not sure what you meant

Reviewer: Sorry, it's actually a comment for line 79.

A paragraph above you said "The first workflow...". In this one you said "The second worfkow". On line 79 you said "this workflow". Which workflow? What is "this" referencing?

Author: ah yes, I need to move it in the middle between paragraph about workflow 1 and 2. Thanks

You can extend this workflow with additional steps, like:

* Integration testing
* Deployment
* Notifications

## GitHub Actions

> Even though I have my opinion about GitHub Actions (for more details, you can read my [post about it](https://dev.to/derberg/github-actions-when-fascination-turns-into-disappointment-4d75)) I still think it is worth investing in it, especially for the release workflows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Even though I have [my opinion about GitHub Actions](https://dev.to/derberg/github-actions-when-fascination-turns-into-disappointment-4d75), I still think it is worth investing in it, especially for the release workflows.
```

> We used the GitHub-provided actions and the following awesome actions provided by the community:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We used the GitHub-provided actions and the following awesome actions built by the community:
```

or

```suggestion
We used the GitHub-provided actions and the following awesome actions offered by the community:
```

I like built better.

- [Create Pull Request](ttps://github.com/marketplace/actions/create-pull-request)
- [Auto Approve](https://github.com/marketplace/actions/auto-approve)
- [Merge Pull Request](https://github.com/marketplace/actions/merge-pull-requests)

### Release workflow

> Release workflow triggers every time there is something new happening in the release branch. In our case, it is a `master` branch:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Release workflow triggers every time there is something new happening in the release branch. In our case, it is the `master` branch:
```

```yaml
on:
  push:
    branches:
      - master
```

#### GitHub and NPM

For releases to GitHub and NPM, the most convenient solution is to integrate [semantic release](https://github.com/semantic-release/semantic-release) package and related plugins that support Conventional Commits. You can configure plugins in your `package.json` in the order they should be invoked:

```json
"plugins": [
  [
    "@semantic-release/commit-analyzer",
    {
      "preset": "conventionalcommits"
    }
  ],
  [
    "@semantic-release/release-notes-generator",
    {
      "preset": "conventionalcommits"
    }
  ],
  "@semantic-release/npm",
  "@semantic-release/github"
]
```

> Remember that functional automation should use a technical bot rather than a real user. GitHub Actions allow you to encrypt credentials to different systems on the repository level and referring them in actions looks as follows: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Conveniently, functional automation uses a technical bot rather than a real user. GitHub actions allow you to encrypt the credentials of different systems at the repository level. Referring to them in actions looks as follows: 
```

Regarding replacing "remember" with "conveniently": It would be great if you could point to some online resources explaining the reasons. 

Github Actions -> Singular, name of the product.
Github actions -> Plural, the actions of your workflow.

Also, I split the last sentence to make it shorter and easier to read.

```yaml
- name: Release to NPM and GitHub
  id: release
  env:
    GITHUB_TOKEN: ${{ secrets.GH_TOKEN }}
    NPM_TOKEN: ${{ secrets.NPM_TOKEN }}
    GIT_AUTHOR_NAME: asyncapi-bot
    GIT_AUTHOR_EMAIL: info@asyncapi.io
    GIT_COMMITTER_NAME: asyncapi-bot
    GIT_COMMITTER_EMAIL: info@asyncapi.io
  run: npm run release
```

> The great bonus thing you get from this toolset is that at the end, once your pull request is merged and released, you get helpful information under it that it is a part of the release:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Aside from automation, the bot will also comment on every pull request included in the release notifying participants their code has been shipped. Isn't it awesome?
```

My suggestion to rephrase this sentence.

Author: I will change to below to eliminate will and to also include issues. what you think?

```
Aside from automation, the bot also comment on every pull request and issue included in the release notifying subscribed participants that the given topic is part of the release. Isn't it awesome?
```

Reviewer: Yup. Just notice it should be "the bot also **comments**".

![pr info about release](/images/posts/pr-indicator.png)

#### Docker

> For handling Docker, you can use some community-provided GitHub Action that abstracts Docker CLI. I don't think it is needed if you know Docker. Some of the commands you might want to also reuse during local development, like image building and have them behind npm script like `npm run docker-build`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For handling Docker, you can use some community-provided GitHub action that abstracts Docker CLI. I don't think it is needed if you know Docker. You might also want to reuse some commands during local development, like image building, and have them behind an npm script like `npm run docker-build`.
```

```yaml
- name: Release to Docker
  if: steps.initversion.outputs.version != steps.extractver.outputs.version
  run: | 
    echo ${{secrets.DOCKER_PASSWORD}} | docker login -u ${{secrets.DOCKER_USERNAME}} --password-stdin
    npm run docker-build
    docker tag asyncapi/generator:latest asyncapi/generator:${{ steps.extractver.outputs.version }}
    docker push asyncapi/generator:${{ steps.extractver.outputs.version }}
    docker push asyncapi/generator:latest
```

#### Bump version in package.json

> A common practice is that once during release, you bump package version in `package.json`, you should also push the modified file to release branch. Be aware though that good practices in the project are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A common practice is to bump the package version in `package.json` on every release. You should also push the modified file to the release branch. Be aware though that good practices in the project are:
```

- Branches should have basic protection enabled. There should be simple rules that block pull requests before the merge.

Release workflow, instead of pushing directly to the release branch, should commit to a new branch and create a pull request. Seems like an overhead? No, you can also automate it. Just keep on reading.

```yaml
- name: Create Pull Request with updated package files
  if: steps.initversion.outputs.version != steps.extractver.outputs.version
  uses: peter-evans/create-pull-request@v2.4.4
  with:
    token: ${{ secrets.GH_TOKEN }}
    commit-message: 'chore(release): ${{ steps.extractver.outputs.version }}'
    committer: asyncapi-bot <info@asyncapi.io>
    author: asyncapi-bot <info@asyncapi.io>
    title: 'chore(release): ${{ steps.extractver.outputs.version }}'
    body: 'Version bump in package.json and package-lock.json for release [${{ steps.extractver.outputs.version }}](https://github.com/${{github.repository}}/releases/tag/v${{ steps.extractver.outputs.version }})'
    branch: version-bump/${{ steps.extractver.outputs.version }}
```

#### Conditions and sharing outputs

GitHub Actions has two excellent features:
- You can set conditions for specific steps

> - You can share the output of one step with another

Reviewer: ```suggestion
GitHub Actions has two excellent features:

- You can set conditions for specific steps
- You can share the output of one step with another
```

The list is broken on the HTML version if you don't introduce an empty line.

These features are used in the release workflow to check the version of the package, before and after the GitHub/NPM release step. 

> To share output, you must assign an `id` to the step and declare a variable and assign any value to it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To share the output, you must assign an `id` to the step and declare a variable and assign any value to it.
```

```yaml
- name: Get version from package.json after release step
  id: extractver
  run: echo "::set-output name=version::$(npm run get-version --silent)"
```

> You access the shared value by the `id` and the variable name like `steps.extractver.outputs.version`. We use it, for example, in the condition that specifies if further steps of the workflow should be triggered or not. If the version in `package.json` changed after GitHub and NPM step, this means we should proceed with Docker publishing and pull request creation:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can access the shared value by the `id` and a variable name like `steps.extractver.outputs.version`. We use it, for example, in the condition that specifies if further steps of the workflow should be triggered or not. If the version in `package.json` changed after GitHub and NPM step, this means we should proceed with Docker publishing and pull request creation:
```

          npm run docker-build
          docker tag asyncapi/generator:latest asyncapi/generator:${{ steps.extractver.outputs.version }}
          docker push asyncapi/generator:${{ steps.extractver.outputs.version }}
          docker push asyncapi/generator:latest
      - name: Create Pull Request with updated package files
        if: steps.initversion.outputs.version != steps.extractver.outputs.version
        uses: peter-evans/create-pull-request@v2.4.4
        with:
          token: ${{ secrets.GH_TOKEN }}
          commit-message: 'chore(release): ${{ steps.extractver.outputs.version }}'
          committer: asyncapi-bot <info@asyncapi.io>
          author: asyncapi-bot <info@asyncapi.io>
          title: 'chore(release): ${{ steps.extractver.outputs.version }}'
          body: 'Version bump in package.json and package-lock.json for release [${{ steps.extractver.outputs.version }}](https://github.com/${{github.repository}}/releases/tag/v${{ steps.extractver.outputs.version }})'
          branch: version-bump/${{ steps.extractver.outputs.version }}
```

## Automated merging workflow

> Your first question here should be:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You may be asking yourself:
```

> _Why automated approving and merging is handled in a separate workflow and not as part of release workflow_

> The reason is that time between pull request creation and its readiness to be merged is hard to define. Pull requests always include some automated checks, like testing, linting, and others. These are long-running checks. You should not make such an asynchronous step a part of your synchronous release workflow. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One reason is that the time between pull request creation and its readiness to be merged is hard to define. Pull requests always include some automated checks, like testing, linting, and others. These are long-running checks. You should not make such an asynchronous step a part of your synchronous release workflow. 
```

Another reason is that you can also extend such an automated merging flow to handle not only pull requests coming from the release-handling bot but also other bots, that, for example, update your dependencies for security reasons. 

> You should divide automation into separate jobs that enable you to define job dependencies. There is no point to run **automerge** job until the **autoapprove** job ends, and GitHub actions allow you to set this with `needs: [autoapprove]`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should divide automation into separate jobs that enable you to define their dependencies. There is no point to run the **automerge** job until the **autoapprove** one ends. GitHub Actions allows you to express this with `needs: [autoapprove]`
```
